---
title: "Speech and Phenomena notes 4: Repeatability"
date: "2021-08-22T15:38:54.000Z"
slug: "speech-and-phenomena-notes-4-repeatability"
tags:
  - "derrida"
---

<p>I've now reached chapter 4, 'Meaning and Representation'. This is the chapter I read during the hot weather a few weeks ago, and my notes are terrible. It also looks like an important chapter, oh dear. Before I start I'll just link <a href="https://twitter.com/Meaningness/status/1429150034637987842">this twitter conversation on structuralism</a> that I had with David Chapman and others, for future reference.</p><p>There's some more difficult stuff at the start of the chapter. I'm going to skip forward a couple of pages and start with this quote about repeatability that I liked. Signs need to be repeatable rather than one-off unique events, they need to be somewhat abstracted from the flux of experience:</p><blockquote>When in fact I effectively use words, and whether or not I do it for communicative ends (let us consider signs in general, prior to this distinction), I must from the outset operate (within) a structure of repetition whose basic element can only be representative. A sign is never an event, if by event we mean an irreplaceable and irreversible empirical particular. A sign which would take place but "once" would not be a sign; a purely idiomatic sign would not be a sign. A signifier (in general) must be formally recognizable in spite of, and through, the diversity of empirical characteristics which may modify it.</blockquote><p>This is going to be important for understanding his différance concept I think. But also I find this idea of repeatability interesting in general. One of the things I was looking for in the visual programming post was what sort of repeatable 'grammars' of elements were present in non-text-based languages. Rules for connecting lines and boxes, for instance.</p><blockquote>It must remain the same, and be able to be repeated as such, despite and across the deformations which the empirical event necessarily makes it undergo. A phoneme or grapheme is necessarily always to some extent different each time that it is presented in an operation or a perception. But, it can function as a sign, and in general as language, only if a formal identity enables it to be issued again and to be recognized.</blockquote><p>I'm still muddled on how repeatability connects back to indicative vs expressive signs, and to the monologue argument. And I'm also confused by what Derrida/Husserl mean by 'representation'. I think I need some help from a secondary text at this point... googling around, <em>Derrida's Voice and Phenomenon</em> by Vernon W. Cisney has a couple of recommendations from other people I've found helpful. Got hold of a Kindle copy and I'll have a try at that before tackling any more.</p>
