---
title: "Habit propagation"
date: "2021-11-05T18:04:22.000Z"
slug: "habit-propagation"
---

<p>I'm using a Mac for the first time (it's a new work computer) so I'm spending a lot of time hitting the wrong keyboard shortcuts and getting frustrated. On the other hand, it's an interesting exercise in watching habits reform. I keep going through the following process:</p><ul><li>using the wrong shortcut on the Mac</li><li>using the wrong shortcut on the Mac, but having some awareness of 'oh no I'm using the wrong shortcut' as I do it</li><li>the awareness propagating ahead of hitting the key, so I get the right shortcut </li><li>using the right shortcut on the Mac, without thinking about it. Woohoo, unconscious competence! Except...</li><li>now I'm also using that shortcut on Windows, and it's the wrong shortcut :(</li><li>then I have to go through the same awareness propagation loop on Windows</li><li>finally I'm hitting the right keys on both</li></ul><p>It's not exactly this clean, and it's muddled because I'm learning multiple shortcuts at once, but it goes <em>something</em> like that. Anyway the main reason I wrote this down is because it prompted me to look up a relevant story from Phil Agre's <em>Computation and Human Experience</em>, and I wanted to copy it down for future reference:</p><blockquote>This story covers four days one winter. One morning upon arriving at my office, I decided I was tired of my coat cluttering my office, so I decided to leave the coat lying on top of the file cabinet just outside my office door. Shifting my concern to the day's work, I walked into my office and pushed the door shut behind me as always - except that today it didn't slam behind me as usual. Investigating, I found that an edge of the coat had caught in the door jamb, preventing the door from closing. I moved the coat out of the way, closed the door, and went back to work. The next day I left the coat on top of the file cabinet, headed into my office, and pushed the door shut as always - and it didn't slam behind me again. This time, though, I immediately knew what the problem was. The next day I left the coat on top of the file cabinet as before, but as soon as I turned to head into my office I realized that the coat was liable to get caught, so I moved the coat out of the way again. The fourth day, I was aware of the problem as I was placing the coat down on the file cabinet, so I made a point of placing it as far as practicable from the door jamb. On each day, a bit of the previous day's insight had drifted back toward the beginning of the routine.</blockquote><p>This story doesn't have the habit interference bit, but it does have the awareness propagation.</p>
