---
title: "Books I read in 2021"
date: "2021-12-29T13:28:57.000Z"
slug: "what-i-read"
---

<p>I forgot the books section of <a href="/notebucket/almost-end-of-year-review/">my review</a> so let's add it in now. I don't keep a record so this is just me piecing it together at the end of the year and I'll have forgotten a few. </p><p>Before I start I'm going to make a guess at what the list will look like. I normally read a decent but not enormous number of books: generally I finish maybe 10-20 books, including low-effort fiction, and skim bits from about the same number again. I expect this year was the same. I <em>think</em> my reading was particularly bimodal this year, with the non-fiction being unusually difficult and almost all of the fiction being very easy comfort food rereads.</p><p>Marie Kondo was obviously <a href="/notebucket/life-changing-magic/">the big inspiration this year</a> but I'm not sure if I read both books this year or last year, I have no sense of time any more.</p><p>OK let's find out. Books I finished:</p><ul><li>Elliott - Existential Kink. Entertainingly weird self-help book that a lot of the Twitter postrats like. Didn't do much for me but then again I didn't do the exercises so wouldn't expect it to.</li><li>Kondo - The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up. Actual life-changing magic like it says on the tin. I <em>did</em> do the exercises, probably more comprehensively than any other book I've ever read.</li><li>Kondo - Spark Joy. Apparently I did read both this year.</li><li>Sethi - I Will Teach You To Be Rich. This sounds like a <em>really </em>terrible self-help book, but I actually liked it a lot. Style is shouty American but the content fits well with Kondo, just for money not things.</li><li>Vygotsky - Thought and Language. This was very good, I wrote about it <a href="https://bucketoverflow.substack.com/p/april-2021-thought-and-language">here</a> and <a href="https://bucketoverflow.substack.com/p/may-2021-internalisation">here</a>.</li><li>Kolakowski - Husserl and the Search for Certitude. Also very good and I wrote a lot of notes starting <a href="/notebucket/husserl-and-the-search-for-certitude/">here</a>.</li><li>Nelson - On Writer's Block. On emotional aspects of writing more generally, not just writer's block. I thought this was good while I was reading it but it's somehow not very memorable.</li><li>Portis - True Grit</li><li>Hartman - Seraphina. Comfort food reread.</li><li>Hartman - Shadow Scale. Same</li><li>Pratchett - Small Gods. Same</li><li>Streatfeild - Ballet Shoes. Same</li><li>Streatfeild - Apple Bough. Same</li></ul><p>plus significant chunks of:</p><ul><li>Bowker and Star - Sorting Things Out. Interesting content, find the writing style a real slog.</li><li>Scott - Two Cheers for Anarchism. Didn't do much for me, feel like I learned enough Scott for my purposes by reading everyone's blog posts on legibility</li><li>Dutilh Novaes - Formal Languages in Logic. Been picking at this slowly the last two years.</li><li>Derrida - Voice and Phenomenon. Started writing a series of notes (starts <a href="/notebucket/speech-and-phenomena-notes/">here</a>) on this and then bailed because it was too hard. I <em>might </em>now have enough background to go back.</li><li>Cisney - Derrida's 'Voice and Phenomenon'. This is the secondary source I got to help me after I bailed. It's very useful.</li><li>Husserl - The Philosophy of Arithmetic. Not exactly a page-turner but I want to understand a few bits. Some notes <a href="/notebucket/the-philosophy-of-arithmetic-1/">here</a>, hopefully more soon.</li><li>Salmon - An Event, Perhaps (this is a biography of Derrida. I'm still reading it, not sure whether I'll finish it or not - it's good and very clear but I don't care so much about his later stuff)</li><li>Dantzig - Number: The Language of Science. Old pop book about maths, also still reading and not sure if will finish.</li><li>Matthew - The Meaningful Money Handbook. I wanted a UK-specific money book to go with the Sethi one. It's not exciting but it's fine.</li><li>Kondo and Sonenshein - Joy at Work. Review <a href="/notebucket/marie-kondo-for-rectangles/">here</a></li><li>Smith - On the Origin of Objects. Every so often I bang my head against this book a bit more.</li><li>Ingalls Wilder - Little House in the Big Woods. Forgot I started this oops</li><li>Twain - Huckleberry Finn. Every few years I start reading this, enjoy it and then mysteriously stop</li><li>Lewis - The Screwtape Letters. Started reading on the train a few days ago, may finish but probably can't be bothered</li></ul><p>So, yep, pretty much what I expected except I forgot about the self-help. Mix of Husserl/Derrida effortreading and switch-brain-off fiction.</p>
