---
title: "Productisation"
date: "2022-01-19T17:55:54.000Z"
slug: "productisation"
---

<p>Vaguely thinking about 'productisation' today. I resisted using this word for some time as it's such an incredibly ugly-sounding piece of business jargon, but unfortunately it's also useful. Wiktionary describes it as follows:</p><blockquote>(computing, business) The act of modifying something, such as a concept or a tool internal to an organization, to make it suitable as a commercial product.</blockquote><p>I first came across the term when I was working at a company that made one-off bespoke web applications, mostly for government agencies. We got bought by a much bigger company that was aiming to productise some of these applications and sell them to other countries, or to local government, or whatever. I don't know how far they got, it was kind of difficult and I left before they got much traction.</p><p>On a much larger scale, I guess AWS is a gigantic example of productisation. Taking Amazon's internal tools for running servers and so on and 'un-situating' them, making them into repeatable lumps that can be sold to external customers.</p><p>Anyway I haven't suddenly become a business blogger, this is still just me banging on about my normal obsessions. I find productisation fascinating as a source of examples of how abstraction actually works. You've got to take a bunch of code that's highly coupled to a specific situation, and 'transform it out' into a less indexical form. In the simplest case that might be allowing some hard-wired values to vary and sticking them in a config file somewhere, but it gets a lot more complicated than that. </p><p>I'd love to read a <em>Talking About Machines</em>-style ethnography that followed a group of people trying to productise something. It wouldn't necessarily have to be a company... I'd also enjoy reading about e.g. some scientists in a lab making their balky research prototype into a reusable component. This would be a great example of the sort of 'natural history of science' described in David Chapman's thread here:</p><figure class="kg-card kg-embed-card"><blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">“A science of science” seems like it would be enormously valuable, but so far attempts have been disappointing. Michael’s analysis leads me to think we’re skipping a step. We need “the natural history of science” first.<a href="https://t.co/PIOK98n2Le">https://t.co/PIOK98n2Le</a></p>&mdash; David Chapman (@Meaningness) <a href="https://twitter.com/Meaningness/status/1482039075640995842?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 14, 2022</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
</figure><p>If anything exists like this, let me know! I'm particularly interested in <em>details</em>, natural history style, not high level overviews. The more gory details of config file formats the better.</p><p>Related note: <a href="/notebucket/stabilisation/">stabilisation</a>.</p>
