---
title: "Dinosaur man altruism"
date: "2022-09-06T19:08:28.000Z"
slug: "dinosaur-man-altruism"
---

<p>I've had this phrase in my head for a while now. It probably needs explaining, so here you go, have some context:</p><figure class="kg-card kg-embed-card"><blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">This tweet has completely lodged in my mind to the point where I think &#39;I&#39;m a dinosaur man&#39; at some point most days <a href="https://t.co/SW4QmDc8fN">https://t.co/SW4QmDc8fN</a></p>&mdash; Lucy Keer 🪣 (@drossbucket) <a href="https://twitter.com/drossbucket/status/1374436250510270468?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March 23, 2021</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
</figure><p>For better or worse, I identify strongly with the dinosaur man here. I don't <em>want</em> to cure cancer, I want to... well, I don't actually want to turn people into dinosaurs, that sounds like hassle. But I do want to investigate whatever weird topic I'm currently fixated on, without worrying about whether it's 'the right thing to do'. </p><p>I don't expect thinking about <a href="https://drossbucket.com/posts-archive/#:~:text=Negative%20probability.">negative probabilities</a> or <a href="/tag/derrida/">Derrida</a> or whatever it is this month is going to be The Most Important Thing I Could Do For The World, but I do it anyway, because that's what I want to do. I'm strongly protective of my sense of taste, and tend to view attempts to steer me directly towards usefulness as... well, the mental image I get is <a href="https://www.cnet.com/a/img/resize/f3268e3c910565a17246c9192d460d553f3aa8b5/2014/02/25/0646229b-a5ca-11e3-a24e-d4ae52e62bcc/stomp2.jpg?auto=webp&amp;fit=crop&amp;height=675&amp;width=1200">that big Monty Python cartoon foot</a> coming down to squash the life out of me. I run away out of pure self-preservation.</p><p>So, as you can imagine, I have a hard time with effective altruism. The EAs are pretty close neighbours to me on the internet, and I've made some friends in that world too by now, and I do strongly admire their determination to make things better. But I also get a strong impulse to run away from the giant foot. </p><p>Anyway, I've slightly calmed down about this recently, and can engage with EA culture a little more. It still seems offputting, but not in the intense way that it used to. I think the main reason for this is that my relationship to paid work has radically improved in the last year. I made a shift from programming to technical writing, and this style of work is a <a href="/notebucket/background-textures-of-work/"><em>much</em> better fit</a>. I'm no longer bored and frustrated all the time, and I don't have this constant sense of needing to claw back time for my own interests to compensate for that. I can finally turn down the volume knob on this intense protectiveness towards my own taste. </p><p>Now that I can do that, of course it turns out that I don't have literally 0 impulse towards being useful. I still need a strong internally generated sense of fascination with a topic, but given two topics where I can sustain that I'd rather pick the more generally useful-seeming one. So I'm starting to think more seriously about what kinds of altruism are practically available to a dinosaur man like me.</p><p>I was browsing the EA Forum a while back — yes I know I just said I find EA offputting, but also I have an intense craving to read large amounts of text on the internet, and sometimes I ban myself from my usual sources — and saw something oddly inspiring: <a href="https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/u76hM793BDvyqfdAH/the-case-for-rare-chinese-tofus-1">The Case for Rare Chinese Tofus</a> by George Stiffman. It sort of looks like it's going to be a generic research report about a potential intervention for reducing factory farming, but if you keep reading this and <a href="https://georgestiffman.medium.com/a-complete-list-of-chinas-27-tofus-7274f764d24">his linked Medium posts</a> you realise that he's writing this because he's obsessed with tofu. He writes about spending a couple of years travelling around China, <a href="https://georgestiffman.medium.com/master-apprentice-and-biofuel-4539bc0e7936">apprenticing with a chef</a> and <a href="https://georgestiffman.medium.com/plant-treasures-in-the-land-of-meat-and-fish-65f137814aec">trying lots of obscure vegan food</a>. Now he wants to grow the tofu market in the US and introduce tofu styles that are a better fit for western cooking methods than the ones we have currently.</p><p>I don't know anything about the tofu market in the US, so I can't be sure that this is a particularly effective plan to improve the world, or even a good idea for a business venture. But it's a very dinosaur-man-shaped plan, starting from a strong base of intrinsic interest and then working out what he can do with it. It's appealing to me because he's pushing <em>towards</em> finding interesting flavours and textures, rather than just pulling away from eating meat and dairy. I want to try all the foods he's talking about!</p><p>Maybe I can do something similar? I mean, not selling tofu, but working on things that I already think about all the time and slowly cranking up the 'useful' in <a href="https://meaningness.com/enjoyable-usefulness">'enjoyable and useful'</a>. I'm really enjoying the technical writing skillset and it looks like that's a good base to start from. Reincorporating a bit of maths or physics into my life would be nice, and I can probably combine that with technical writing in some useful ways. (I'm still keen on the whole <a href="https://drossbucket.com/2017/06/19/research-debt-double-distilled/">research distillation</a> line of thinking, for a start. Or more straightforwardly I could write docs for something maths-heavy.) </p><p>Derrida and negative probability might be more of a stretch, but, well, you never know...</p>
