---
title: "Before the LLM there was the vulgus-book"
date: "2025-05-14T12:00:00.000Z"
slug: "before-the-llm-there-was-the-vulgus-book"
---

<p>I like the section from <em>Tom Brown's School Days </em>that explains a 19th century public school method for cheating on your homework.</p><p>One of the standard pieces of homework at Rugby was the vulgus, a short Latin composition on a given theme. Masters had to assign a <em>lot </em>of these, and so would eventually resort to reusing the same theme.</p><p>This led to the technology of the vulgus-book:</p><blockquote>To meet and rebuke this bad habit of the masters, the schoolboy mind, with its accustomed ingenuity, had invented an elaborate system of tradition. Almost every boy kept his own vulgus written out in a book, and these books were duly handed down from boy to boy, till (if the tradition has gone on till now) I suppose the popular boys, in whose hands bequeathed vulgus-books have accumulated, are prepared with three or four vulguses on any subject in heaven or earth, or in “more worlds than one,” which an unfortunate master can pitch upon. At any rate, such lucky fellows had generally one for themselves and one for a friend in my time. The only objection to the traditionary method of doing your vulguses was the risk that the successions might have become confused, and so that you and another follower of traditions should show up the same identical vulgus some fine morning; in which case, when it happened, considerable grief was the result. But when did such risk hinder boys or men from short cuts and pleasant paths?</blockquote><p>To create your vulgus, you would stitch together pieces from several different examples in the vulgus-book, as many as you thought you'd need to hide your tracks:</p><blockquote>Now in the study that night Tom was the upholder of the traditionary method of vulgus doing. He carefully produced two large vulgus-books, and began diving into them, and picking out a line here, and an ending there (tags, as they were vulgarly called), till he had gotten all that he thought he could make fit. He then proceeded to patch his tags together with the help of his Gradus, producing an incongruous and feeble result of eight elegiac lines, the minimum quantity for his form, and finishing up with two highly moral lines extra, making ten in all, which he cribbed entire from one of his books, beginning “O genus humanum,” and which he himself must have used a dozen times before, whenever an unfortunate or wicked hero, of whatever nation or language under the sun, was the subject. Indeed he began to have great doubts whether the master wouldn't remember them, and so only throw them in as extra lines, because in any case they would call off attention from the other tags, and if detected, being extra lines, he wouldn't be sent back to do more in their place, while if they passed muster again he would get marks for them. </blockquote><p>I wondered if anyone else had noticed how much this method was like being a human ChatGPT (with a somewhat smaller corpus of text), and, yep, here's a short paper by Tom Ue: &nbsp;<a href="https://muse.jhu.edu/pub/1/article/925211/pdf" target="_blank" rel="noopener" class="underlink bluelink" tabindex="-1">Thomas Hughes’s Tom Brown’s Schooldays , ChatGPT, and Academic Integrity</a>.</p>
